[## AZ 900

#### Resources:

* https://marczak.io/az-900/#navigation
* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKDSAYDLGrI&list=PLlVtbbG169nED0_vMEniWBQjSoxTsBYS3&index=16
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/paths/azure-fundamentals-describe-azure-architecture-services/
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/credentials/certifications/resources/study-guides/az-900
* https://education.ditectrev.com/practice?url=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2FDitectrev%2FMicrosoft-Azure-AZ-900-Microsoft-Azure-Fundamentals-Practice-Tests-Exams-Questions-Answers%2Fmain%2FREADME.md&seq=10
* https://github.com/johnthebrit/AZ900CertCourse/blob/main/John%20Savill's%20AZ-900%20Azure%20Fundamentals%20Certification%20Course%20Handout.pdf

#### Cloud computing

Delivery model for services like:
networking, storage(files/db), compute power(os/web), analytics, etc. over the internet.

##### Characteristics of cloud

1. Scalability: Ability of the resource to scale(add/remove resources)
   Types: Vertical(Increasing size of resources), Horizontal(Increasing the amount of resources).
2. Elasticity: Ability of the system to scale dynamically.
3. Agility: In general it is the ability to react quickly. In terms of cloud computing it is the ability to allocate and
   deallocate resources quickly.
4. Fault Tolerance: Ability of the system to remain up and running during component or service failure.
5. Disaster recovery: Ability of the system to recover from a disaster(human made or natural).
6. High Availability: Ability of the system to run for very extended period of time with very little downtime.

##### Economies of scale

As the company grows the price per unit will decrease.
As the cloud grows and has more customers than price will go down.

##### CapEx vs OpEx

1. Capital Expenditure: Own infrastructure, big initial investment to purchase infra upfront, maintenance required.
2. Operation Expenditure: No initial investment, pay for rented infra, no or minimal maintenance.

##### Consumption based pricing model characteristics

1. No upfront cost.
2. No wasted resources.
3. Pay for only those resources that you use.

##### Cloud service type

Infrastructure layer: Networking, storage, virtualization, servers
Platform layer: OS, middleware, runtime(docker, iis)
Software layer: Application & data

1. Infrastructure as a service(IaaS): Cloud provider manages infra, customer manages platform and software.
   Use cases: Migration of workloads(lift and shift from on-prem to cloud), Test & development, Storage, backups and
   recovery.
   Example: Virtual machines, Virtual network, Managed disk.
2. Platform as a service(PaaS): Cloud provider manages infra as well as platform and customer manages software.
   Use cases: Development framework, Analytics & business intelligence
   Example: SQL, function apps, logic apps, app service, etc
3. Software as a service(SaaS):
   Use cases: Buying licence/subscription of the applications.
   Example: OneDrive, Outlook, Teams, Skype, etc

##### Cloud Deployment type

1. Public cloud: All the resources are hosted on cloud, no local hardware, some service share hardware bw different
   customers so there can be issue with security & compliance and with ownership as the cloud providers own all
   resources.
2. Private cloud: Everything runs on our own data center, and we manage all the hardware.
3. Hybrid cloud: Combines both public and private cloud.

#### Core architectural components of Azure

1. **Azure Data Center:** Physical facility for hosting group of networked servers. It has its own power, cooling and
   networking infrastructure.
2. **Azure Regions:** Group of data centers that are connected with each other. They are globally distributed. Region is
   a
   geographical area on the planet which at least contains 1 but usually more data centers connected with low latency
   networks(optical fibre). This is the location for our services. Some services are available only in certain regions.
   Some services are not deployed in specific region.
3. **Availability zone:** Each availability zone is a physically separate data center within a region, with independent
   power, cooling, and networking infrastructure. Azure has at least 3 availability zones in a region but some regions
   doesn't support availability zones.
   **Zonal service:** We can choose which availability zone we are deploying the services to, but we are responsible for
   fail over. Used in IaaS.
   **Zone redundant:** The data is automatically available in different zones and the replication and fail over is
   maintained by Microsoft. Used in PaaS.
4. **Region Pairs:** They are at least 300 miles away from each other in order to lower the impact of region failure.
   Each pair resides within same geography exception is Brazil south.
5. **Geography:** Typically contains two or more regions. They are fault-tolerant to protect from region wide failures.
   They ensure compliance requirements are met. Ex: Americas, Europe, Asia Pacific, etc.
6. **Azure Resources:** Objects used to manage services in azure. Any configuration on service are properties of
   resource and any resource can be represented as a JSON template. A resource cannot exist without resource group and
   each resource can be present in any one resource group at a time.
7. **Resource Group:** Group of resources. The resources can be grouped by type, app lifecycle(dev/prod), department
   name, billing, location, etc. Resource groups cannot be nested.
8. **Subscription:** A subscription trust only 1 Azure AD tenant. Budget, RBAC, policies can be applied to a
   subscription. The rules applied to a subscription is inherited by the resource groups inside the subscription and
   resources inside resource groups.
9. **Management Groups:** To manage multiple subscriptions. We can apply RBAC, policies, budgets to management groups
   which will be inherited by the subscriptions -> resource groups -> resources.
10. **Azure Resource Manager(ARM):** Deployment and management service for creating, updating, deleting resources. All
    the requests(be it portal, cli, rest api, sdk) for managing a resource goes to resource manager where the customer
    is authenticated and upon successful authentication the request is forwarded to the respective service to create the
    actual resources. Resource groups comes under resource manager.
11. **ARM Bicep:** Human friendly language to create resources, it is Infrastructure as Code(IaC). The bicep code is
    transpiled to JSON ARM template.
12. **Azure Capacity Resource(ARC):** It acts as a bridge that extends the azure platform to our environments(hosted
    outside of azure).

#### Azure compute and networking services

1. **Virtual Machines:** Resources required for VM are: Operating system disk, data storage, virtual network(subnet),
   virtual network interface card, public ip, network security group(NSG). IaaS offering
2. **VM Scale Set:** They let the user create and manage a group of identical, load balanced VM. Build on top of VM. A
   template is specified which contains type of OS, config properties, and
   scale(min, max, auto).
3. **VM Availability Set:**
4. **Azure Virtual Desktop:** VDI
5. **Azure Container Instance:** For deploying a single container. PaaS offering
6. **Azure Kubernetes Services(AKS):** For container orchestration.
7. **Azure App Service:**
8. **Azure Functions:** These are commonly user when we need to perform work in response to an event. They scale
   automatically based on demand. They run our code when it is triggered and automatically deallocate the resources
   once done, so they can be cost-effective. They can be either stateful or stateless.
9. **Virtual Networks:** Private network in azure. Can be used when we want to communicate b/w azure resources,
   communicate with on-prem resources, filtering of network traffic, routing of network traffic, integration with azure
   services etc. VNET is limited to a region. If we want to connect two VNETs in different region, we can use peering.
   For connecting an on-prem network to VNET, there are 2 options: 1. to go via internet(site to site VPN) and for this
   there will be a VPN gateway in cloud.
10. **VPN Gateway:** There are 2 types of VPN gateways i.e., 1. Policy based(static type), 2. Route based.

#### Azure storage services

**Storage Accounts:** Storage service for storing data in azure. Like blob storage for massive unstructured data ideal
for images, file storage, disk storage(SSD, conventional disk), table storage, queue storage(synchronous message queue)

**Storage tiers:** Hot(for data that is accessed frequently), Cold(data that is accessed infrequently and data stored
for at least 30 days), Archive(for data that is rarely accessed and data is stored for at least 180 days, not available
online).

**Storage account types:** These are of two types: Standard(GPv2), Premium(Page Blob, Block blob, File share)

**Redundancy options:** All the below 4 options are available if standard storage account tier is selected but in case
of premium only LRS and ZRS is available.

1. LRS: Local redundant storage is where 3 copies are made but in 1 region and only 1 availability zone. Provides
   durability of 11 9's (99.999999999).
2. ZRS: Zone redundant storage is where 3 copies are made in 1 region but 3 different availability zones. Provides
   durability of 12 9's (99.9999999999).
3. GRS: Geo redundant storage is where 3 + 3 copies are made in region pairs but only in 1 availability zone. Provides
   durability of 16 9's (99.99999999999999).
4. GZRS: 3 + 3 copies are made in region pairs. In primary region the copies are present in 3 different availability
   zone but in secondary region all the 3 copies are stored in 1 availability zone. Provides durability of 16 9's (
   99.99999999999999).

**Azure Storage service types:**

1. **Azure Blobs:** Massively scalable object store for text and binary data.
2. **Azure Files:** Managed file shares for cloud or on-prem deployments.
3. **Azure Queues:** Messaging store for reliable messaging bw apps.
4. **Azure Disks:** Block level storage volumes for VMs.
5. **Azure Tables:** NoSQL table option for structured, non-relational data.

**Azure Data movement and migration options:**

1. **Azure File Sync:** Tool to centralize the syncing of files b/w azure file storage service and on-prem file storage
   service. The syncing is done automatically.
2. **Cloud Tiering:** Azure file sync supports it. Let's say we have files that are frequently accessed then will be
   present in local server and other files will be stored in cloud until requested.
3. **Azure Storage Explorer:** Interactive tool to manage storage services.

4. **Az Copy:** This is a command line utility. To copy/sync data from on-prem to azure or from azure to on-prem or from
   other clouds as well.
5. **Azure Migrate:** For migrating VM or DB.
6. **Azure Data box:** For physical data transfer, the data box is shipped to customer, the data is copied and then
   shipped back to microsoft. The storage size is 80TB and this is used for migrating large data more than 40TB.

#### Azure management solutions

1. Azure Portal: Intuitive
2. Azure CLI: Imperative, automation, cross-platform
3. Azure Powershell: Imperative, automation, cross-platform
4. Mobile app: Can be used to view alerts, reports, basic actions.

#### Azure monitoring

1. **Azure Advisor:** Azure Advisor evaluates your Azure resources and makes recommendations to help improve cost,
   performance, security, reliability, operational excellence.
2. **Azure Monitor:** Platform for collecting data on our resources, analyzing the data, visualizing the information and
   even acting on the results. Like monitoring metrics, logs which can be sent to log analytics workspace(azure
   component, can retain data up to 2 years), event hub(pub sub model), azure storage. We can set alerts for different
   resources.
3. **Azure Service Health:** To view the status of global azure infrastructure and our own resources. It
   uses `Azure Status(for global azure status)`, `Service Health(for azure services and regions used by customer)`, `Resource Health(tailored view of actual resources)`
4. **Azure Log Analytics:** Tool in the azure portal where we can write and run queries on the data gathered by azure
   monitor.
5. **Azure Monitor Alerts:** Azure Monitor Alerts are an automated way to stay informed when Azure Monitor detects a
   threshold being crossed. You set the alert conditions, the notification actions, and then Azure Monitor Alerts
   notifies when an alert is triggered. Depending on your configuration, Azure Monitor Alerts can also attempt
   corrective action.
6. **Application Insights:** It is an Azure Monitor feature, monitors your web applications. Application Insights is
   capable of monitoring applications that are running in Azure, on-premises, or in a different cloud environment.

#### Azure identity, access and security

1. **Microsoft Defender for Cloud:** Monitoring tool for security posture management and threat protection. It monitors
   our on-prem, hybrid, multi cloud env to provide guidance and notifications aimed at strengthening our security
   posture.
2. **Microsoft Entra:** AAD is renamed to Microsoft Entra. It is a cloud based identity access management tool.
3. **Azure authentication methods:** Using password, password + MFA, passwordless.
4. **Azure external identities:** Provided by an organization so that users(guest) can access resources of that
   particular organization. It can be B2B(guest user have access), B2B direct connect(mutual, two-way trust with another
   organization like in teams we can connect with those users, and they can connect with us), B2C AD.
5. **Azure Conditional access:** Conditional Access is a tool that Microsoft Entra ID uses to allow (or deny) access to
   resources based on identity signals. These signals include who the user is, where the user is, and what device the
   user is requesting access from.
6. **Azure RBAC:** Azure provides built-in roles that describe common access rules for cloud resources. You can also
   define your own roles. Each role has an associated set of access permissions that relate to that role. When you
   assign individuals or groups to one or more roles, they receive all the associated access permissions.
7. **Zero trust model:** Zero Trust is a security model that assumes the worst case scenario and protects resources with
   that expectation. Zero Trust assumes breach at the outset, and then verifies each request as though it originated
   from an uncontrolled network. It works on 3 key principles: 1. Verify explicitly, 2. Least privilege, 3. Assume
   breach
8. **Defence-in-depth:** The objective of defense-in-depth is to protect information and prevent it from being stolen by
   those who aren't authorized to access it. A defense-in-depth strategy uses a series of mechanisms to slow the advance
   of an attack that aims at acquiring unauthorized access to data.

> ##### Defence-in-depth:
> Each layer provides protection so that if one layer is breached, a subsequent layer is already in place to prevent
> further exposure. This approach removes reliance on any single layer of protection. It slows down an attack and
> provides
> alert information that security teams can act upon, either automatically or manually.
> Here's a brief overview of the role of each layer:
> 1. The **physical security layer** is the first line of defense to protect computing hardware in the datacenter.
> 2. The **identity and access layer** controls access to infrastructure and change control.
> 3. The **perimeter layer** uses distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection to filter large-scale attacks before
     they can cause a denial of service for users.
> 4. The **network layer** limits communication between resources through segmentation and access controls.
> 5. The **compute layer** secures access to virtual machines.
> 6. The **application layer** helps ensure that applications are secure and free of security vulnerabilities.
> 7. The **data layer** controls access to business and customer data that you need to protect.

##### Network Security Groups(NSG)

Set of rules that we create and are linked to subnet where those rules are applied.
It has to be same subscription and same region as VNET. It has certain rules. Rules has name, priority, destination and
source ip, port , protocol and actions(allow/deny).

##### Azure Firewall

Fully managed, autoscales based on demand. Aware of 7 layer and 4 layer.
An Azure firewall is a feature in Azure that allows you to control inbound and
outbound network traffic to and from Azure resources. You can create rules that
specify the ports, protocols, and sources that can be used to access your virtual
networks and virtual machines, and you can apply the firewall to all the virtual
networks in your environment.

It allows you to create network filtering rules at the network level which can limit the
traffic to the entire virtual network, not just to a single virtual machine.

##### Azure Resource locks

They are applied on control plane(ARM) level and not on data plane. They are inherited from parent to child.
This means that if we have a DB resource we can still perform CRUD operations on DB data, but I cannot perform
action(modify or delete) on the resource itself.
There are 2 types of lock: Read only, Delete.

> Tags are key-value pairs. They are not inherited. They are like metadata on resource for management.

##### Azure Policy

Enable guardrails in azure at ARM level. Azure policy can be applied at management group, subscriptions, resource
groups, resources and it is inherited.
Initiative is group of policies.

##### Microsoft Purview

Microsoft Purview is a comprehensive set of solutions that can help your organization govern, protect, and manage data,
wherever it lives. It provides data security, data governance, risk & compliance.
There are many different data sources like Amazon S3, Azure storage, Azure Databases, Power BI, SaaS, On-prem, etc.

##### Cost management in Azure

Factors affecting cost in azure:

1. Resource type
2. Tier(Hot/Cool/Archive)
3. Location
4. Maintenance
5. Subscription type
6. Azure marketplace

[//]: # (<span style="color:purple">some purple text</span>.)]()